
TITLE AND ABSTRACT:
===================


TITLE
-----

Simultaneous segmentation and distortion correction on diffusion weighted MR using shape priors

ABSTRACT
--------
In whole-brain connectivity analysis of diffusion weighted MR images (DWI), an accurate delineation of the white-matter and grey-matter surfaces is required. While high-standard segmentation is readily available for anatomical MRI, such as T1-weighted, DWI typically have drastically lower resolution and strong geometrical distortions. We propose a DWI segmentation-registration framework that exploits the detailed anatomy extracted from anatomical MRI as shape-prior. We use an ``active contours without edges''-like model to look for a deformation field that optimally maps the shape prior on the multivariate features in diffusion space. This joint approach reflects the intrinsic coupling of segmentation and distortion correction. Complementary, a precise and consistent cortical parcellation on DWI is straightforward by projection from T1 space. Thus, we expect to improve the reliability and robustness of the resulting connectivity networks and their comparability within and across subjects. First results on synthetic datasets and simulated DWI confirm the effectiveness of our approach.

AUTHORS
-------
Oscar Esteban (phd@oscaresteban.es)
Alessandro Daducci (alessandro.daducci@epfl.ch)
Meritxell Bach-Cuadra (meritxell.bachcuadra@unil.ch)
Jean-Philippe Thiran (JP.Thiran@epfl.ch)
Andrés Santos (andres@die.upm.es)
Dominique Zosso (zosso@math.ucla.edu)

SUBJECT AREAS
-------------
:Primary:   Segmentation
:Secondary: Brain, 
            MRI, 
            Registration,
            Shape Analysis

ADDITIONAL QUESTIONS
--------------------

1. Elegibility for Erbsmann prize: yes
2. Primary contribution: New technique
3. Optional: other contributions
* The whole-brain connectivity analysis currently integrate by large sets of processing techniques to build complete and readily available software pipelines. This complexity and chaining compromises the consistence among the intermediate results, hindering the reliability and stability of the resulting connectivity network. Our approach combines some highly coupled processing steps upon a unique underlying model. We exploit in all these steps the highly detailed information obtained from the T1 reference (usually obtained with the FreeSurfer's reconstruction process). Therefore, we expect as a subsequent contribution of our work the impact on simplifying the connectivity pipelines and the improvement of reliability and stability of the whole DWI analysis process. 
* We are developing the methodology based on ITK, for future contribution on the mainstream code and dissemination.

4. Details of contribution
We propose a novel ACWE-like segmentation model, where using a strong shape-prior we optimize a deformation field with the aim to achieve an appropriate representation of coupled problem of white-matter segmentation and geometrical distortion correction. Additionally, the obtained deformation allows to impose a fine cortical parcellation defined in the reference space (typically, T1 weighted MRI processed with Freesurfer) to the diffusion weighted (DW) data consistent with the segmentation. Current methodologies address these challenges in a splitted approach, not exploiting the intrinsic relationship between them. The first results showed an appropriate performance of the methodology on synthetic data and simulated data (synthetic model from which a DWI signal has been simulated, distorted and reconstructed).

5. Related work
In terms of methodology:
C. Le Guyader and L.A. Vese, A combined segmentation and registration framework with a nonlinear elasticity smoother Computer Vision and Image Understanding 115(2011) 1689-1709.
X. Bresson, P. Vandergheynst, J.-P. Thiran, A Variational Model for Object Segmentation Using Boundary Information and Shape Prior Driven by the Mumford-Shah Functional, International Journal of Computer Vision 68-2(2006) 145-162.
In terms of application:
L. Zöllei, , A. Stevens, K. Huber, S. Kakunoori, B. Fischl, Improved tractography alignment using combined volumetric and surface registration, Neuroimage 51-1(2010) 206-213.
J.L.R. Andersson, S. Skare, A Model-Based Method for Retrospective Correction of Geometric Distortions in Diffusion-Weighted EPI, NeuroImage 16-1(2002) 177-199
L.J. O'Donnell, C.-F. Westin, Automatic Tractography Segmentation Using a High-Dimensional White Matter Atlas, Medical Imaging IEEE Transactions 26-11(2007) 1562-1575.

6. Suggested reviewers
- Stephen Alyward
- Lilla Zöllei
- Baba Vemuri
- Betrand Thirion
- Polina Golland
- Colin Studholme

